---
layout: post
title:  "A (More or Less) Complete Explanation on s-p Mixing"
date:   2022-01-30 21:21:00 +0900
categories: physical-chemistry
lang: en
---

# A Quick Overview on s-p Mixing

The molecular orbitals (MOs) of homonuclear diatomic molecules can be constructed with the Linear Combination of Atomic Orbital method (LCAO). Let's take $\text{O}_2$ as an example.

First, the $1s$ orbitals of each oxygen atoms contribute very little to bonding as they hardly overlap.

(Image goes here KK)

Thus, we only consider the $2s$ and $2p$ orbitals. For the 2s orbitals, the 2s orbitals can form either bonding orbitals $(\sigma _{g1s})$ or antibonding orbitals $(\sigma _{u1s}^\ast)$.

(Image goes here)

(Image of the entire correlation diagram)

Second, the $2p_{x}$ orbitals and the $2p_{y}$ can form either bonding orbitals $(\pi_{u2p_{x}}$ and $\pi_{u2p_{y}})$ and antibonding orbitals $(\pi_{g2p_{x}} ^{\ast}$ and $\pi_{g2p_{y}} ^{\ast})$.

(Image goes here)

(Image of the entire correlation diagram)

Lastly, the $2p_z$ can form either bonding orbitals $(\sigma _{g2p_z})$ and antibonding orbitals $(\sigma _{u2p_z}^{\ast})$. Because the overlap between AOs is large, the energy split between the two MOs is larger than usual.

(Image goes here)

(Image of the entire correlation diagram)

After filling in the MOs according to the Aufbau principle, the correlation diagram is complete and correctly predicts the paramagnetism of $ \text{O}_2 $.

The correlation diagram of $\text{F}_2$ is the same. However, for other second-period elements $(\text{Li}$ to $\text{N})$, the order between $\pi _{u2p_x}$ / $\pi _{u2p_y}$ and $\sigma _{g2p_z}$ is reversed: the energy level of $\pi _{u2p_x}$ / $\pi _{u2p_y}$ is nearly constant, but the energy level of $\sigma _{g2p_z}$ is raised considerably.

It is the purpose of this blog post to explain this anomaly in energy order, in a way that is complete and most of all, satisfying.

# The Criterion For Orbital Mixing - Revisited

A. Significant Overlap

Axial symmetry: $\sigma$ and $\pi$

Exclude pi orbitals from consideration

B. Similar Energy Level

Show table and graph.

For bonding MOs,

$$\Psi = c_{1}\psi _{2s \vert \text{A}} + c_{1}\psi _{2s \vert \text{B}} + c_{2}\psi _{2p_{\text{z}} \vert \text{A}} + c_{2}\psi _{2s_{\text{z}} \vert \text{B}}$$

For antibonding MOs,

$$\Psi^{\ast} = c_{3}\psi _{2s \vert \text{A}} - c_{3}\psi _{2s \vert \text{B}} + c_{4}\psi _{2p_{\text{z}} \vert \text{A}} - c_{4}\psi _{2s_{\text{z}} \vert \text{B}}$$

Unlike previously thought (c4 = zero, etc)

Can be solved: at a later date

A better, more tangible explanation?

# Mixing Molecular Orbitals

Significant overlap => same sort of symmetry -> maximum overlap

Mixing of $\sigma _{g2s}$ and $\sigma _{g2p_z}$ -> energy level of $\sigma _{g2s}$ decreases and energy level of $\sigma _{g2p_z}$ increases.

(drawing goes here)

Mixing of $\sigma _{u2s}^{\ast}$ and $\sigma _{u2p_z}^{\ast}$ -> energy level of $\sigma _{u2s}^{\ast}$ decreases and energy level of $\sigma _{u2p_z}^{\ast}$ increases.

(drawing goes here)

That is why.

# Summary

From $ \text{Li}_2 $ to $ \text{N}_2 $, the energy levels of $ 2s $ and $ 2p_z $ orbitals are close enough for mixing to occur. Due to the mixing of $ \sigma $ molecular orbitals - $\sigma _{g2s}$ with $\sigma _{g2p_z}$ and $\sigma _{u2s}^{\ast}$ and $\sigma _{u2p_z}^{\ast}$ - the energy levels of $\sigma _{g2p_z}$ and $\pi _{u2p_x}$ / $\pi _{u2p_y}$ are in "reverse" order.